[Music]
hey everybody welcome to a very special
episode of impact theory uh because of
the coronavirus we're all on quarantine
here so this is going to be our first
ever interview filmed on skype and i
cannot think of a better guess today i
have joined me dr judd brewer he is the
director of research and innovation at
the mindfulness center an associate
professor in psychiatry at the school of
medicine at brown university as well as
being a research affiliate for mit and i
think that he has some really cool stuff
to offer us in the way of
the anxiety that's cropping up for a lot
of people in the midst of the
coronavirus outbreak um this is really
historic times this is something i don't
think any of us have seen in our
lifetime certainly not here in los
angeles
um so a lot of people are dealing with
the stress in different ways some of
which may be not as ideal as they would
like it to be so we wanted to bring
somebody on um even though we're not
able to film in person that can help
people with that um so we are doing this
special episode this is going to be
unlike the normal episodes you guys are
used to and that this is going to be
completely unedited uh so if there are
any mistakes uh dr judd this is you and
i we're walking the tightrope with uh
with nothing to catch us if we fall but
um i'm pretty eager to get your take on
what's going on um what what do you
think is happening to people in terms of
their mindset right now
why is talking about dealing with
anxiety as it relates to this so
important i've had so many people say
that we needed to do this episode we
needed to talk about the the stress and
the anxiety um so what's happening with
people right now
yeah you know i was just at the grocery
store for the first time i left my house
for the first time in probably four days
you know brown had its first confirmed
case over the weekend and so i've been
laying low
and the the shelves are relatively empty
and i think that phenomenon comes where
these survival mechanisms start to
spiral out of control so i think that
might be a good place to start is just
to help us all understand like how our
basic survival mechanisms work and how
they spiral out of control because then
that lets us get back into control so
the first place to start is really
understanding fear and fear responses
are normal they're healthy they're
adaptive they help us survive a simple
example you know if we walk out into the
street and we look to the side and we
see a car barreling down on us jump back
on the sidewalk and that fear response
says hey remember what almost happened
so we learned to look both ways before
crossing the street so it's a very
adaptive learning mechanism
some time over the last million years or
so our our survival brain kind of
layered on this neocortex this new part
of the brain that includes the
prefrontal cortex the thinking the
planning part of the brain planning also
very very helpful for survival
yet the planning part of the brain
needs something really important which
is accurate information
right now with coronavirus we don't have
we have some accurate information but we
actually don't know a whole lot about
you know what's the
what's the time window of contagion this
this and that
uh so we're getting more information
every day but we don't know we don't
really have a lot of accurate
information
so if you pair fear with uncertainty
your our thinking brain starts to spiral
out of control in these what if what if
what if scenarios and we get anxiety
okay so anxiety makes our thinking
brains start to go offline
on top of that
you add in social contagion okay social
contagion is basically the pass of
emotion from one person to another you
know if somebody's talking to somebody
else on the phone and that other
person's anxious they're we're more
likely to get anxious or if we talk to
somebody who's panicking or if we go on
social media and we see all these panic
posts you know like bare shelves at the
grocery store or whatever
that um that social contagion we can
actually catch that anywhere in the
world we don't need to be six feet you
know closer than six feet to somebody to
catch that
so social contagion might even be more
contagious uh than viruses in in
bacteria
when you add
social contagion to
anxiety and that anxiety starts to
spiral out that's when we get panic
right and panics when our prefrontal
cortex goes completely offline and we
start doing things that are not helpful
like
buying all the toilet paper at the
grocery store you know probably don't
need six months worth of toilet paper
and we probably didn't go to the grocery
store thinking you know i'm gonna stock
up on toilet paper this six months
we don't do that we go to the grocery
store looking for groceries and then we
see everybody else you know with where
there's a run on toilet paper
and suddenly
one thing i want to make sure that we
cover today is going to be what to do
about this and how we get people back to
normal but i'm super curious
yeah speaking to your social contagion
idea how did toilet paper become the
thing because i i guarantee that's not
like just where people naturally go
someone somewhere must have said
something i think it but i actually
don't know what happened i don't know
when this became a thing or when people
started panicking about toilet paper um
so do you know how that particular idea
spread
i don't know what the the vector of
origin was
but somewhere
somebody started talking about toilet
paper and then other you know it spread
to other people spread to other people
and then suddenly it was the toilet
paper meme i actually was talking to
somebody two days ago and they said yeah
we're actually calling it the toilet
paper index
you know the the stock market has a fear
index
well you know you can think of our
consumer market being you know what's
the toilet paper index but i think it
just got seated somewhere and that
became the meme for you know panic
it's really interesting so the the
notion of memes and the notion of how
rapidly ideas can spread i think gives
people
a really clear understanding of how this
stuff ramps up and how you can plant a
seed in somebody's mind that then
mushrooms into something because this
one the the toilet paper index
caught me off guard i was like what is
going on of all the things to get weird
about toilet paper like it just seemed
like
food i get i get how people are panicked
buying food i even understand like
sanitizer and soap but man
that toilet paper is the thing that
people are lining up for in grocery
stores and getting in fist fights over
um that one that one really caught me
off guard it's
so what i'm hoping we can do in this
episode is plant a similar idea in
people's minds and having researched you
i'm pretty sure i know what the idea is
gonna be
um
but i wanna i want people watching this
to get an idea planted in their mind
around how to use the um
basically the habit loop triggers
positive reinforcement and negative
reinforcement to to realign their mind
and i'm hoping that in the way that
you're able to do because
for people watching uh dr judd is also a
specialist around addiction and has
helped people
tremendously there and it's it's really
extraordinary the amount of impact
you've been able to have with something
that i never would have imagined was
useful in addiction so
um walk us through
one what is the central idea if you were
going to plant something in people's
minds and have it be the meme that that
takes over now
in this sort of crisis state what is
that
idea that you would plan
the idea that i would plan is really to
understand how our minds work so we can
keep our prefrontal cortexes online
that's one i'm going to plant two
the second one is find what i call the
bigger better offer and there are bigger
better offers than fear and anxiety and
panic they don't actually feel good so
if i could just plant start planting the
seed around kindness a connection and
calm they actually all feel better in
our brain and my lab's actually done
research around this um so those are the
bigger better offers we're going to help
guide ourselves toward and the the
secret ingredient for that is awareness
okay so i think that is there's there's
some really interesting things that
people are going to need context around
um they're used to hearing ideas around
mindfulness um kindness connection that
sort of drifts into outer space in a way
that i don't particularly resonate with
um the way that you are able to bring
that down
um for people make it accessible i think
starts with the first idea you wanted to
plant now dude this was when i started
learning about you i was like whoa like
you i have come at this from a very
unscientific standpoint but the thing i
always tell people is if you want to
understand how i got out of this feeling
of hopelessness that i was in in my
early 20s it was i had to research the
brain how it actually works because for
me being able to imagine the brain and
the idea that i'm obsessed with getting
people to understand is you're having a
biological experience
because you're having a biological
experience i highly recommend getting
your mind around some of the biology so
this notion of being actually
understanding the brain process i think
is is really important and i'd love for
you to walk people through what are some
of the basics that if they understood
they'd begin to have an easier time
wrangling their thoughts yeah
so i've been studying this for a couple
of decades now and the more i study the
simpler it gets so the one thing i want
to start with is telling people you
don't have to be brain surgeon to
understand this stuff you don't even
need to be a neuroscientist like i am to
understand this stuff
anybody can understand this and and we
can actually uh get this out there in
ways that people can really see
significant changes whether it's
addiction or anxiety or eating or
whatever so the basic process let's
start with survival right so
three steps or three elements of a habit
loop that that's really set up to help
us survive a trigger a behavior and a
reward so let's start with uh positive
reinforcement that you mentioned so you
see food right out on the savannah our
ancient ancestors they see food that's
the trigger they eat the food that's the
behavior and then their stomach sends
this dopamine signal to their brain that
says remember what you ate and where you
found it so that's that brain reward and
we can talk about what reward actually
feels like later but that from a brain
perspective that's the reward that's
positive reinforcement so we remember
where to go get food same thing is true
with negative reinforcement you know
you're out on the savannah looking for
food saber to tiger comes at you if you
run away that behavior you know helps
you survive that's your reward and so
that negative reinforcement says hey
avoid that part of the savannah in the
future so it's actually a relatively
simple process so habits are actually
really helpful so think about this
setting up habits every morning if we
had to relearn everything from walking
to putting on our clothes to making
breakfast and making coffee to eating
and talking you know we'd be exhausted
by breakfast
so setting up these habits is actually
really important i think of it as set
and forget our brains set a habit say
okay this is good thing for survival and
then we forget about the details okay
so that's the first step in terms of
understanding how this process works
three elements trigger behavior reward
positive reinforcement is we do more of
the things that make us feel good like
eat food and then we do fewer of the
things that make us feel bad you know we
avoid things that make us feel bad like
avoid things that are dangerous that's
the first part does that make sense
yeah definitely so in
this context i one thing going back to
how the brain works that i found really
interesting is you've talked about how
so this is often called operant
conditioning if i'm not mistaken yeah
and i forget the guy's name but somebody
won a nobel prize for showing that this
this goes back all the way
evolutionarily to sea slugs so you want
to talk about something that is is just
baked into the the the foundation of how
our mind works um is is really important
so give people an understanding so
what's going on now in the context of
covid19
how how is this mechanism working
against people
yeah so let's focus in on anxiety
because that's what we're seeing a lot
of right now so anxiety can actually get
reinforced in a negative reinforcement
loop through operand conditioning so if
we're afraid if there's fear that's the
trigger the behavior is worry
and that worry
helps us feel like we're doing something
right we not might not know what to do
but at least our mind is doing something
the problem is that worry doesn't
actually feel that good it doesn't get
things done and it actually starts to
make our prefrontal cortex go offline so
we can't think
and worry can start to trigger more
anxiety so if we're anxious that
triggers worry and that worry transfers
more anxiety you we can start to see how
that spirals out of control i think of
this is like going over the event
horizon into that black hole of anxiety
it's just it's really hard to pull
yourself out
and so
now when people find themselves in this
loop what are some of the things that
they can do so you've got a whole book
obviously called unwinding anxiety
or an app excuse me how do you help
people begin to
unwind like and and how did you come up
with that phrase because as somebody
who's dealt with anxiety i would say
literally of all the words you could
choose that is the perfect one so
why unwinding
well you know i don't know anybody
that's never been anxious in their life
and i've been treating anxious patients
for a long time
and you know i i have plenty of anxiety
myself so it feels like we actually get
all wound up in anxiety and it literally
feels that way it's like it's tight
there's studies showing that people
report most that anxiety is kind of this
tightness in their chest and so when we
get all wound up you know what winds us
up it's that worry you know worry is
that thing that's like tightening it
down and down and down and down so it
just felt like the right
term for that app it's like oh yeah
we're all wound up how can we unwind
it's not fix or change or ignore that's
not what we're doing the only way we can
work with this is to work direct you
know the only way out is through you
know you've probably heard that phrase
so the only way out of anxiety is
actually through it and as we go through
it we can talk about what that means
it actually helps us unwind so that we
don't you know those
habitual mechanisms of getting wound up
don't actually they're not as sticky
anymore not as not as contracted i think
we do need to touch on how you go
through um this is probably the right
time to talk about awareness as well a
quick definition on what awareness is
how we achieve it and then how we use
that to go through anxiety i think would
be really really useful
i'm terrible with it with definitions
awareness is a really tough one you know
it's kind of like we all have this
faculty of being aware of stuff
um but i'm not sure how i could
scientifically define it beyond you know
uh when we're awake and aware of
something we're aware
when we're unconscious we're not aware
uh so you know pragmatically speaking
hopefully that's at least a good enough
working definition
it's not even a definition but a working
description of what what awareness is
it's like you know
a little so with
what i find is the
the big breakthrough moment for somebody
and i am very much speaking from my own
experience here is
um when i hear a word and i feel like i
know what it means
and yet there's still a disconnect for
me in that experientially i'm hearing
somebody talk about awareness is a
perfect example i'm hearing somebody
talk about it and i don't i don't feel
what they're trying to convey but i know
what the word means so i'm now i'm
really lost and so this is this is an
idea that i'm not sure i'll be able to
articulate but let me give it a shot so
um there there is a god i'm gonna try
something that may not be useful for
people but it is how my mind has
connected things so um there are games
where video games where it's more about
the rhythm in which you press the
buttons than that you press the buttons
in a certain order and the slight
variation so if anybody ever plays a
fighting game they'll understand this
there's a there's a certain rhythm that
if i were to just tell you press you
know the buttons in this sequence the
move wouldn't happen but if you get the
rhythm of the exact sort of spacing
between that then you get something same
with music right it's the space between
the notes there's there is this same
thing
with words where the words are meant to
convey a
feeling that that there's uh there's an
activity and action behind the words so
i think what
people need to understand about
awareness you are going to have to do
some
work that i'll say that exists at a
physical level to actually understand
the definition so i'm going to give you
how i would define it experientially
through meditation but if i'm going
astray of what you mean jump in and stop
me so
i did not understand what people meant
by awareness until i started trying to
meditate
when i started trying to meditate i
realized that okay i'm sitting here i'm
thinking stuff of course i'm awake i'm
aware and conscious like you were saying
it as the sort of antithesis to being
unconscious but i don't get it i'm not
having whatever experience people wanted
me to have and then when i got into
mindfulness meditation around what do
you hear right now
and
recognizing that when you're not
thinking about what you're hearing
you're just hearing it
that's
mindful awareness and i was like oh
because i could now i get at a bite like
i have the chills i have at a body level
i understand now what you're saying
where i am i am literally just here with
the rain i use rain because when i
meditate um i put over the ear
headphones on and i listen to the sounds
of nature
nine times out of ten it's going to be
the sound of thunderstorm and what i
find is
when i'm completely present with the
sound of the rain
then i'm actually in what i'll call an
alpha wave state
when i
am
not noticing the sound of the ring it's
there for sure but i'm not i'm not there
with it it isn't sort of the only thing
i'm experiencing then i know that i'm
i'm drifting i'm sort of not aware even
though i'm awake and i'm conscious and
all that i'm having thoughts but i'm not
i'm not aware of the way i think you
mean it now does that get pretty close
i think that's great and i think one
differentiation you're pointing out to
people experientially is there's
awareness and there's attention right so
our attention can wander
to you know maybe our mind we get lost
in thought like daydreaming or you know
something else um so there's a tension
that can be over here and so that means
we're not aware right here so you know
if you're meditating and you're
listening to the sounds of nature and
your mind drifts off into a thinking
pattern you're not aware of that sound
and so i think that awareness and
attention piece uh applies here as well
but i think you've described it
beautifully and and like you're saying
this is really ineffable it's hard to
really define what awareness is uh
but we all know it because we're you
know it's we're conscious of things and
when we're conscious we're uh or
mindfully or consciously aware that's
the awareness that we're talking about
here
yeah so i wanna i wanna bring that home
for people because for them to go
through your process of unwinding the
anxiety they have to translate i think
this was certainly true for me with
dealing with anxiety you you have to
learn to translate an intellectual idea
into a body experience which by the way
i've heard you often refer to when
somebody gets it into their body
yeah as wisdom
and i think that's really interesting
yeah i think of that as like concepts so
up in our head concepts in the service
of embodied wisdom so our thinking brain
doesn't actually hold a candle in terms
of what drives a action it doesn't hold
a candle to our feeling body because
those feelings are where urges and
cravings and things like that come from
so we can understand something
intellectually but it doesn't actually
affect behavior until we have this
embodied wisdom where like we know this
in our bones
no that makes sense okay so
now hopefully we've gotten people a
little bit closer to awareness um how do
we go through anxiety what does that
mean
yeah so just as an example in our own
wedding anxiety app we have a three-step
process and the first step is to map out
these habit loops around anxiety but
somebody could do this with anything you
could do with panic you can do it with
any habit that you're that anybody's
struggling with so if we're not aware of
these habit loops that trigger the
behavior and the reward
we're just going to keep acting them out
automatically unconsciously not aware
right so the first step is to just
become aware oh there i'm stuck in my
habit loop again let's use worry as an
example oh there i'm worrying again you
know all there i'm worrying the next
step
is really about hacking into our brain's
reward based learning system
and the way that this works is that our
brain stores a hierarchy of values of
different behaviors
i'll use
chocolate as a simple example okay
so if i have if i eat some broccoli my
brain stores a certain reward value for
that and then if i eat chocolate my
brain stores a different reward value
for that and because chocolate is more
densely packed with calories
from a survival perspective my brain's
gonna be like chocolate dude and so
let's say broccoli milk chocolate for me
when i compare milk chocolate to dark
chocolate no-brainer dark chocolate and
then it's like 70 okay i like 85 percent
better does it have sea salt does it
have cayenne pepper you know what brand
is and all this stuff so i've got this
very nuanced hierarchy of dark chocolate
in there but basically my brain when
given a choice it's going to pick
chocolate over broccoli okay
so this reward hierarchy is actually set
up in a part of our brain called the
orbital frontal cortex not that
important but if anybody wants to know
some of the neuroscience here
and that part of the brain is always
deciding when given two choices what
should i do and it's going to pick the
one that's more rewarding so from that
perspective we bring in awareness and we
have to help ourselves see really
clearly how rewarding is this behavior
right now so let's use uh let's use cake
or smoke let's use cake as an example
we tend to lay down the reward value of
cake early in life right every birthday
party we go to
we're going to reinforce that value of
cake and we're going to add not just to
the taste of cake but we're going to add
friends
fun presents you know party all this
stuff so that gets laid down and that
composite reward value gets stored and
it goes up and gets reinforced every
time every party we go to so by the time
we're 40
and our brain's like dude don't think
about it there's cake just eat it right
and so that reward value for when we
were five is still playing out now and
we can't you know we're like well why
can't i just stop eating cake you know
we can't think our way
out of a bad habit that's not how our
brains work we have to update the reward
value so here you know we have to ask
ourselves
bring conscious awareness in and ask
ourselves hey how rewarding is this
right now not intellectually but in an
embodied feeling i'll give an example
with uh with smoking for example so with
my patients in my clinic who want to
quit smoking
i have them smoke and they look at me
like doc i thought it was you know
aren't i supposed to quit smoking
the point there is i have them smoked
but i have them pay attention when they
smoke and they realize that smoking
actually tastes like you know it
doesn't taste very good uh that's what
all the vaping stuff aside so they've
kind of bypassed that piece
uh which is why vaping's so addictive we
can talk about that later but with
cigarettes they realize oh this really
doesn't taste that good i remember a guy
who was he'd been smoking 40 years
and i had him smoke uh consciously and
he came back and he's like i can't
believe i never noticed this before we
calculated it out he had reinforced that
process 293 000 times right so it was
totally unconscious for him until it
became conscious as soon as it's
conscious whether it's cigarettes or
eating three pieces of cake when we're
not hungry when we're stressed if we
bring awareness to that our brains can
actually see how rewarding is this not
that rewarding it doesn't take willpower
doesn't take effort it simply takes
awareness right so as that reward value
drops it because they're doing
consciously right they are telling
themselves so
this actually tastes gnarly
they're not telling themselves anything
they're simply tasting right my patients
come in and they know that they're
supposed to quit smoking they don't tell
themselves oh this should taste bad
because that that doesn't actually land
in their experience so how do chocolate
cake which really is tasty
yeah there's nothing wrong with
chocolate cake but tell me does the
fourth piece taste as good as the first
no but it's still fun
yeah and then what happens afterwards
stomachache
sometimes so maybe not i want well i
want to make this as as difficult as
possible so that people don't write it
off because i actually think it is super
super powerful
so
what i want to know is how you get
people and and i think it's in your line
of questioning i think you're answering
it but um when you take something that
is
actually pleasurable are you you're just
trying to find that part of it that
isn't pleasurable so for instance if i
ate as much cake as was pleasurable i
would i mean what one reasonable size
pieces i wouldn't go crazy but like one
piece reasonable side piece a day maybe
twice a day would be pretty easy if i
did one early and then one late now over
time it's going to have consequences
inflammation and stuff like that but i
don't know without sort of thinking my
way through it if i would ever
reduce its value
yeah and we can't think our way into
changing behavior so if we could do that
we would just remind ourselves that you
know smoking is the worst thing we can
do for our health and nobody would ever
smoke but that's not how it works
so what we have to do is actually feel
into it and i think you're bringing up a
really good point this is awesome which
is this is not to try to convince
ourselves that cake or whatever is bad
is to help us see the natural
consequences i'll give an example with
an experiment that one of my friends did
for her phd thesis really briefly she
was doing a chocolate experiment where
she was feeding people chocolate as she
was scanning their brains with a pet
scanner her name is dana small she's a
food researcher at yale and she what she
did was she would have people pick their
favorite chocolate and then she would
feed them right and she would just have
them rate how good is this and so of
course you know i'm getting spoon-fed my
favorite chocolate this is awesome and
she'd keep feeding them and feeding them
and feeding and you can imagine how that
rating changed right okay it's still
okay
and then they're thinking what the hell
did i sign up for this is terrible by
the end of the experiment same chocolate
they're like uh this is awful get me out
of here so we all have these reward
value set points right and this is not
the chocolate is bad or we should tell
ourselves to stop eating chocolate it's
simply that when we bring conscious
awareness in we can see where we need to
stop and with cake for example it's not
just the the taste of it
it's everything that comes with it so
for example my my uh folks we have a we
have an app called eat right now and
folks that are come to use that program
they're really struggling with losing
weight or
you know sugar addiction or whatever
and what we have them do is look at all
of the results right just like
with a birthday party we bring together
cake plus party plus this plus this in
the same way when we're in our mid-40s
or whatever and we're looking at cake
and we're saying i ate this because i
was stressed i wasn't even hungry so
it's not just the taste of it right
really paying attention a lot of people
don't actually pay attention it doesn't
taste that great when we're not hungry
when we're stressed it's just there to
do something and distract us one of my
patients said you know it's about
numbing out
so if we pay attention you know it might
taste good for a couple of bites but if
we're not hungry that satisfaction is
going to go down pretty quickly and then
there's the guilt there's the gut bomb
there's all that stuff so it's bringing
our awareness to the results of that
behavior which is actually step two of
this of this process
so
you know i hope that makes sense in
terms of this is not about demonizing
any behavior it's simply about helping
us tap into our natural body's wisdom
which knows hey i'm not hungry why are
you eating this you know if you're
stressed let's do some stress reduction
as compared to eating cake because it
doesn't fix the cause of the stress
one thing i'd love to talk about is so
i'm sure some people watching right now
are thinking um covet 19 my anxiety my
fear there's no reward mechanism here
but i've heard you talk about this so
what is the reward mechanism how does it
fall into a habit loop cycle when it's
something that seems so inherently
negative
right so this is probably where the
planning mind just got tipped a little
bit so planning helpful right like we
talked about
but when we don't have enough
information that planning literally tips
into worry
and worry
is not helpful because worrying you know
makes us more stressed more anxious
makes our prefrontal cortex go off on
and we can't actually plan when we're
worried but there's this fine line where
it's like this rager's edge where it's
like okay let me plan
but then when we
when we tip that into worry where it's
like oh maybe i missed something you
know or maybe i should just think about
this one more time it's like you know
you plan a trip to the airport which
nobody's going to be doing anytime soon
but if you plan a trip to the airport
it's good to check that twice make sure
you haven't you know missed anything but
if you go and you check it three times
and four times and 18 times and you know
there's going to be a level of
diminishing returns where you're
starting to think oh you know what if
uber goes on strike or what you know
we're thinking about all these crazy
things that are not going to happen
so there's this tipping point where
planning is helpful it tips into worry
the worry itself has this reward of
feeling like we're doing something you
know maybe i'm gonna catch something
that i missed before
and that's kind of like the lottery
maybe one time in a hundred we do catch
something we're like oh yeah i forgot
this well that sends this huge dopamine
spritz in our brains like winning the
you know winning the jackpot you know on
the slot machine and our brains like oh
yeah you should do this all the time
no worry is not helpful
so when um you're dealing with a crisis
like we're dealing with now where there
really are consequences if you don't
take it seriously and this is where when
i'm talking to people i'm always like oh
like you need to take it seriously but
you also need to calm down like you need
to
center yourself you need to laugh still
like
how do you help people like if you were
going to give instruction
on how to begin to
break themselves out of that cycle
in this context where yo you do need to
pay attention yo you do need to take
this seriously um but at the same time
like we want to help people
manage that stress and anxiety and keep
it in a useful place
if you had like a couple
you know steps or tips tricks however
you want to think of it like what should
people be doing i would say there's a
simple three-step process that
ends in you know what did they say in
world war two uh keep calm and carry on
right which is you know when london was
getting bombed all the time by the luff
off or whatever
they um
you know they had to keep calm and carry
on because they didn't know you know
their lives were literally in peril so
there was real danger there so here step
one map out habit loops around anxiety
so that we can actually see how our
minds are spinning out of control if we
don't know how our minds work we're
never going to be able to work with them
so that's step one right
uh trigger behavior reward map out the
anxiety habit loops map out the worry
habit loops knock out the map out the
panic habit loops step two
is is actually relatively simple but
it's the one that our brains don't want
to see
which is really ask yourself drop in
your direct experience when you do
something that is you know a worry habit
loop when you're in the middle of where
you ask yourself what am i getting from
this and like you pointed out it's
relatively straightforward we don't get
much from worry
so we have to be able to feel that feel
into that and really see wait this
really isn't helping right now
then our brains need to be able to
compare that to something else that's
where this bigger better offer comes in
so step three
is helping ourselves see what's the
bigger better offer so for example go go
into the bigger better offer um
neurologically what is that i've heard
you talk about how the the mind is sort
of always looking for the bbo i found
this so interesting it really hit me as
immediately recognizable in my own
experience yeah so the bbo is basically
anything that feels better so
we talked about that getting wound up in
anxiety
we can all feel what that contracted
closed down feeling feels like right in
our own direct experience and anxiety
feels closed down
so compare feeling fear
to in your own experience right now what
does fear feel like compared to joy does
it feel more closed or more open
definitively more close
and which one feels better joy all day
long okay so we're not all gonna
necessarily be joyful right now
now compare fear to calm which one feels
better call
okay and what does calm feel more
expanded
yes i don't know that that's the word i
would have used but yeah and that's not
choices yes yeah so
calm feels better than fear so our
brains got this fear lower on the bbo
list
calm higher on the bbo list how about
connection when you feel connected with
others
yeah which one feels better amazing
connection for sure okay so let's just
choose calm and connection
bbo is compared to fear anxiety and
panic right that's a no-brainer
okay
so what we need to do
is remind ourselves
and really feel into
what calm and connection feel like and i
actually just so
um i just put out a video this morning
on youtube so i'm putting out daily
videos to help people with with
coronavirus anxiety
and i was in a conversation uh yesterday
on a podcast or something where somebody
was asking me you know what are some
practical tips that you could do and it
occurred to me we have these two my wife
and i have these two very furry cuddly
cats
and so i was thinking wow cuddling feels
so much better than being anxious
and so i did a short video this morning
on tips to help us spread
calm
as the contagion
rather than fear right let's let's let
connection be that new infection so to
speak
and so i just on camera my cat was game
um you could actually hear him purring
so i just demonstrated okay what's it
feel like when you cuddle with a being
you know if you're if your spouse and
you are together you know you cuddle
with your spouse if you live alone you
can cuddle with your pets um if you
don't have pets we can actually i just
made up this yoga move called the the
hug pose where we can just go like
spread our arms wide and then we can
just hug ourselves right so that that
physical connection actually feels
pretty good
so there are these bigger better offers
that are out there right now
one thing i would like to add is you
know
hopefully a silver lining here could be
people could go out and adopt or foster
pets right now because you know i don't
know of them as coronavirus vectors
right
so if anybody's listening to this and
has thought about fostering a pet
especially dogs that need this
go out foster a puppy adopt a pet and
cuddle right you can you can quarantine
yourself with your pet
it's okay
and that's almost certain that they they
prove that dogs are not vectors for
covet 19. people should look that up
don't take my word for it but um look it
up definitely heard that that uh is true
and most things don't jump from um
animals to humans anyway obviously covet
19 being an exception but
for the most part that doesn't happen so
um that's really interesting talk to me
um go a layer deeper into isolation so
if you the worst punishment that a human
being can have is to be isolated you
actually see fractures in people's
psyches if they're isolated long enough
which i cannot believe is true uh but
does seem to be actually true even
people in um solitary confinement in
prison would rather be around murderists
rapists than to be completely isolated i
legitimately that just seems shocking to
me um so what is it about isolation
what's going on in the brain that would
actually be really interesting and then
in this time period um i think that the
pet thing is huge fostering for anybody
that
didn't hear the distinction between
adopting and fostering fostering would
be a temporary replacement of course if
you end up falling in love with your
dogs as much as i love mine and maybe it
does become a permanent home
but
that that's really interesting are there
things beyond that that we can do to
get out of that so just to recap
isolation what's going on in the brain
and then beyond pets is there anything
that we can do
to feel more connected uh over the
internet i don't know anything
yeah so
it's interesting you mentioned solitary
confinement because to really kind of
torture and i really feel like it's
torture
uh for solitary confinement to work to
fracture people's psyche they can't have
any contact right so
no you know they they try to you know
talk to people through the cells and all
this they it's just like complete
silence they have to be with themselves
so in the brain
i don't know all of the specific ins and
outs of that i'm not sure that people
have done fmri studies with people who
have been in solitary confinement but
what i what i can say is it's you know
it's pretty clear that as you're
pointing out that social isolation is
really challenging
the nice thing here is we have this
thing this double-edged sword called the
internet
and so on one hand it can spread social
contagion in a negative way
on another hand it can spread social
purell so to speak or brain sanitizer in
a positive way so we can stay connected
with others through
texting each other calling each other on
the phone getting on skype like we're
doing and just having these face-to-face
interactions and i think the
face-to-face is really key here there's
something really different about having
a conversation with somebody on the
phone than having it with them face to
face a lot of that probably has to do
with most communication actually happens
non-verbally you're nodding your head
right now so i've just you've just
communicated with me
non-verbally right now you're smiling so
all this stuff
um so
the the fact that we've got skype and
zoom and all these teleconferencing and
video conferencing pieces is really
helpful i actually run
a live
group every week for the people using
our apps and we use zoom to tell it to
video conference and it's really
connecting people connect from all over
the world and to be able to to answer
questions and interact with people
literally face to face even if they're
in europe or in australia or whatever is
is really really helpful
yeah so um i've always been shocked when
my wife and i first got together
obviously boyfriend and girlfriend at
the time she was living in london i was
here in la and all we had was phone call
and email and this is in the days of
long distance and i was poor so doing
phone calls was
we did it rarely so it was mostly email
and when
skype and video calls came out i was
like i can't believe how impactful this
is makes a huge difference if i'm
able to see her or anybody for that
matter or just hear them it's really
interesting have you done vr
with other um people
i have not but i would now you're
peaking my curiosity dude i'm telling
you right now do it it is crazy so i did
a version with just like a samsung phone
so it was really low quality but it was
um it was filming i think oh one of the
um the cirque du soleil and so there was
this character from oh and they start
really far away in the background and
they just keep walking closer and closer
and closer to the camera until they're
you literally feel like you need to back
up because the sense of presence is so
real i was really surprised by how
impactful that was
i think that's a really good piece of
advice for people is just if you've got
somebody that you can video with do it
i'm going to ask you a curveball
question so let's say that somebody
unfortunately finds himself in this
position they're a sort of social
isolationist they because they're
bumping into people all the time they
don't even think about it so they they
don't have a network of friends they
don't have somebody that they can call
and hang out with
on a video call
does reading help
that's a great question thank you for
the curveball let's see how i do
so there i would say if we can connect
with the characters in the book like if
it's a really good novel
it's a there's a feeling of connection
there where it's like oh and i don't
know about you but when i read a really
good book it feels pretty darn good
so that that's the first thing i would
say is you know if you're reading a book
don't read a book about covet 19
[Laughter]
because there probably isn't one because
nobody's written the book yet
but i would say read a really good book
where you can really relate to the
characters and in that sense we're gonna
start to fire off these brain systems
that are around you know really around
like being able to put ourselves in
other people's shoes and i i'm get i
would guess that that absolutely can
foster connection as well but it's an
experiment that people can try for
themselves yeah it's one that so i was
thinking about this like um i've often
thought about
because i don't feel compelled to be
around people which i think would
surprise people but i find
especially at i don't know called the
last 10 or 15 years of my life i have
felt very introverted which wasn't
necessarily true when i was growing up i
definitely would have identified as an
extrovert as a kid
but as i got older i found myself
retreating more and more into my
imagination and so i thought like would
i really like
break if i were isolated long enough and
i've
i don't know why but like thought what
if i were like tom hanks and
um oh man i'm blanking on the movie lost
uh no where he he is the island lost on
the desert island we are both blanking
on the name of this right now i cannot
believe it i've seen this movie so many
times it's so good uh but anyway he's on
the desert island by himself and
would i over time break would i be able
to talk to an inanimate object or
something like that i thought i really
feel like i would because when i'm
reading a book i get so immersed
in that world and i'm it it really makes
me want to know why isolation is so hard
is it what you're talking about is it
projecting yourself into somebody else's
shoes um
you know what what are the mechanisms is
it the emotional change because there
are things from the outside that are
taking you on this emotional roller
coaster because you're getting input
from the outside i don't know but for me
reading books
even more even though i am definitely a
movie guy over books i would say reading
has an intimacy
that nothing else has and so
the good news is if you have even if you
don't have books in your house if you
have an internet connection
you'd be able to get into a book and i
have a feeling at least in the short
term that it would be a pretty viable
way
to
solve whatever that
pain is that's created through isolation
which is my
big concern so when i think about like
what's gonna freak people out and this
admittedly is probably just a blindness
that i have um i don't get freaked out
by
um the disease itself there's even
though we don't know a lot about it
there just seems way too much data like
i would say most people probably pay it
at one to one and a half percent
fatality rate you see some people saying
even lower even if it was insane and it
was five percent which it is not but
even if it was 95 survival rate right so
i that one doesn't freak me out but the
thought of people having to isolate
themselves the thought of like the
economic disaster that could happen from
that that's where i worry about people
i'm really beginning to
wind themselves up as you're saying and
having a hard time and so
going back to that pleasure loop of
having some way to emotionally connect
with something um as a way to lower that
books seem like the sort of great
equalizer
absolutely absolutely and i and i think
there's one other piece that we can even
add to that and i love your idea about
books i hadn't thought about that it's
brilliant
this fear of the future anxiety is about
fear of the future and so if we think
about you know you brought up a couple
of things like oh what about economic
collapse what about this you know and
our minds spiral out of control right
they wind up more and more and more the
more out in the future we get because
the less and less certainty we have so
the idea there is this comes you know i
learned so much from my patients
one day at a time right if we notice
that our mind spiraling out say hey
take a deep breath ground yourself in
your experience you know use a short
mindfulness practice let your prefrontal
cortex come back online and say hey do i
need to worry about six months right now
i don't know what six months are going
to look like let's start with today
and if today even seems overwhelming
let's start with what needs to happen
this next hour so we can take or this
next minute or this next moment right so
we can take it moment by moment and that
will help us stay grounded in
actionable stuff because we have
accurate information for this moment
like do i need to eat something do i
need to drink something do i need to
relax do i need to cuddle my pet you
know what do i need right now we know
that and we can say okay let's take it
this moment let's take it this hour
let's take it today and then we'll worry
about tomorrow tomorrow or not worry
about tomorrow we'll plan for tomorrow
as tomorrow comes
talk to me sort of from the trenches as
somebody who
has spent a lot of time seeing patients
what does i find that looking at the
extremes or looking at when
the brain is sort of broken and gone
into like a whole another place helps us
sort of view where we're at through a
different lens
what does this look like the anxiety the
worry the isolation what does that look
like when it's taken to the extreme in a
person what are what are some real life
obviously abstracted but real life
stories you've encountered
and what did people have to do to come
back
one thing i'm thinking of is i have a
patient who
suffered from severe panic so the
extreme of anxiety is panic right where
and it's interesting panic disorder
is only a disorder when we it's not
about the panic attacks themselves it's
about worrying about having panic
attacks in the future and when we start
worrying you know that's when things go
out of control so just to give an
example i had a patient who was about 40
when he came to see me
and it's like i've only been seeing him
about six months now i guess um and he
was describing he was visibly shaken
when he came into my office
and you know i sat sat him down got his
history and he was describing he said
you know when i drive in my car down the
highway i feel like i'm in a speeding
bullet
so he was this freaked out there's that
extreme he was this freaked out about
driving to the point where even driving
to my office which was just a couple of
miles away not even on the highway he
was visibly shaken
the other thing i noticed about him was
that he was extremely he was very very
obese he was about 180 pounds overweight
so with him that there's an extreme i
just sent him home with our own wedding
anxiety app and i said okay just map out
your habit loops just start there he
came back two weeks later and he's like
oh
i lost 14 pounds i was like what i
thought we were talking about anxiety
but this is where we can learn from the
extremes he's like oh yeah i would eat
because i was anxious and i realized
that doesn't actually help the anxiety
so i stopped doing that right he became
disenchanted and not excited to have
that stress eating anymore long story
short
over the next six months he lost 97
pounds whoa
his hypertension went back to normal
blood pressure reins he had a fatty
liver that was back to normal and get
this i was walking out of class one day
this was like a month ago or a little
bit longer so walking out of class one
day at the school of public health at
brown and it's on a it's in downtown
providence on south main street so i
walk out into the courtyard and this car
pulls up to the curb and the guy rolls
down the window and i look over and it's
my patient
and he's got this big smile on his face
goes hey dr judd i was like you're
driving and he's like oh yeah i'm an
uber driver now
did not see that one coming that gave me
the chills i know i know so
he mapped he learned how his mind worked
and he started working with it and the
way he talks about it when i see him now
is he says i'm in version 2.0
i'm in version 2.0 like he's he's he's
so
he even came in the other day and said
wow you know i feel so
like i feel normal for long periods of
time it feels strange
because he just never experienced what
it feels like to be normal
he just anxiety was how he identified
with his experience so there's an
extreme where it goes from panic
disorder where you can't drive to
becoming an uber driver all from mapping
out how his mind worked and losing a
bunch of weight too
as an assignable
the being in a speeding bullet thing
that is really interesting to me that is
um
that reminds me of how i ended up
getting more and more anxious as time
went on because
i i think in metaphors so much i think
in visual imagery
which i'll often convert to words so i
would say something like that to myself
right like man this isn't a car that's
like being in a speeding bullet now you
have imagery that escalates so you go
from i'm in a car and it is
traveling fast and you really should
take it seriously because it is you know
i mean it is probably the most dangerous
thing everybody does any you know any
average day
but once you go oh this is like a
speeding bullet now it gets scarier
you've actually given yourself the
imagery the words to
help you escalate at a neurological
level you hardwire that and now just
through sheer repetition and now it's
like you're feeding your own sort of
escalation protocol
and
i find that the de-escalation protocol
is very much the same it's it's finding
a new way to reframe what you think of
so for him like if you just think about
it in simple terms obviously i'm going
to skip a bunch of steps but if you
think about the story he told himself
from this is a speeding bullet bullets
kill i'm gonna be killed by this beating
bullet
two
this is an economic opportunity i'm
gonna thrive because of this it's like
the they are the same thing they are the
same act all he has done is reframe it
and that's why i'm so obsessed with this
notion so i don't know how much you know
about my story but um impact theory was
born out of working in the inner cities
a lot i'm like these people are
really bright but what are they doing
like they're living their life in a way
that does not make any sense they're
caught up in gangs i worked with many
former drug dealers um gang members
people that have been arrested for
violent crimes and i was like dude
you're like a normal person you're so
rad you're so bright so how on earth is
it that you look at the world like in
this weird ass way
and i was just like oh man this is a
frame of reference problem and so just
trying to like get them to and
the punch line of frame of references it
is all encompassing and it's not
one thing you have a frame of reference
for everything and it creates like this
almost impenetrable
um
[Music]
force field of intellect i don't know
how to explain it you're just seeing the
world from such a weird vantage point
that everything seems dangerous or a
threat like there was one guy and i'm
telling you this is one of the most
extraordinary human beings i've ever met
in my life i am so desperate to either
make a movie about his life or have him
write a book or something crazy life
story but this guy super bright if you
challenged him there's actually like a
socrates quote or something i forget who
said it but it's like
may i never mistake criticism for an
attack
and he mistook criticism like if you
said he was doing something wrong you
invalidated his whole existence and he
wanted to fist fight right then and
there and watching it from the outside
was so bizarre because you're like
dude he said that uh don't like wipe the
sanitizer off your hands you have to let
it dry naturally because it will protect
um you know the the food that we're
preparing
and for him that was just like we have
to fight we have to fight right
now and i'm like what is happening it
was so strange
so yeah frame of reference like getting
people to see in in what's going on with
like even i'm hesitating to use the
words crisis
because that is a frame of reference
right as of right now if you haven't
gotten sick it's like to exist in crisis
mode to be framing it like that you're
just you're gonna ratchet it up and so
this is where i sketch out and i talked
about this earlier but i want people to
take it seriously i i told my employees
to work from home about eight or nine
days before
um the mayor of los angeles started like
implementing things to keep people at
home it's like hey it it struck me as
self-evident that that was going to be a
great way to go about it but i didn't
want people to think that i was
panicking so it's like getting that
nuanced frame of reference of
understanding that hey for sure take it
seriously sanitize don't shake hands
don't hug the social distance wherever
you can but don't make it worse with
your frame of reference
amen brother
[Music]
and and i think one thing you're
pointing out is related to some of the
neural imaging just some of the brain
imaging research that we've done with
experienced meditators for example so a
lot of meditation as you know from your
own direct experience is about learning
to not take things personally
right so when we feel something as an
attack we close down just like we close
down with fear and anxiety it's a
survival mechanism but when we close
down we're not open to learning right
carol dweck talked about
fixed versus growth mindset we have to
be in growth mindset to learn
so if we can learn that being close to
criticism is actually painful it
physically feels painful and at the same
time it doesn't open us to learning
if we can start to see wait a minute
this is not a threat
right and we this is where awareness
comes in wait a minute is this really
threatening right now is somebody
physically or whatever threatening me
oh no they're not they're actually
trying to help we can bow to that as a
teacher and say oh
oh i have this reaction can i learn from
this and then that automatically opens
us to growth mindset and all of this is
about learning to take things less
personally so that we can keep our
prefrontal cortex online and thinking
and taking things seriously but not
personally
no man that's really really good advice
um
where can people connect with you and
get a litany of that kind of stuff uh
website where can they find your app all
that good stuff yeah so my website's dr
judd.com drjud.com
and we have a youtube channel that is
just i think drjud as well so people can
subscribe to that again i'm putting out
daily short videos to help people
understand this stuff so they can
subscribe to get the latest on those
they can hit me up on twitter at brewer
at j-u-d-b-r-e-w-e-r
and then the app that we talked about
most was the unwinding anxiety app so i
think that's just unwinding anxiety.com
we have an eating app called eat right
now and i think that's it go
eatrightnow.com and then we have a
smoking app uh soon to also be a vaping
app um for it's called craving to quit
um so they can people can find all of
those through my website doctorjudd.com
or look at the go to directly to those
websites and i think our company is is
so mission the the folks that run the
company i mostly just do research
they're so mission oriented i think
they're even giving people a big
discount on the unwinding anxiety app
right now to just try to you know help
people whenever they can so um i think
that's the best place to connect with me
i might have missed something um i wrote
a book but it's just it's about craving
called the craving mind but it's not as
critical as this other stuff right now
where we're we're all in this together
very cool and if you were gonna have
people um
make
one change or do one thing that would
help them have the biggest impact on
their um fear and anxiety right now
during covet 19 uh what would you have
them do
i would say connect
so let's spread
connection rather than contagion or
whatever you know what let's have
connection be infectious um so connect
with others whether it's on skype
whether it's on a phone call
whether it's offering well wishes on
social media but don't you know don't
spread the panic
don't spread anxiety even if you think
you're being helpful
take a pause ask yourself is this post
helpful
is this gonna you know and if you're
like well i'm spreading i'm helping
people see that the grocery stores are
empty don't do that you know probably
not that helpful
um if you're showing people that the
grocery store shelves are full
that's helpful and that also spreads
calm so let's spread calm and connection
uh rather than than some of the panic
that we're seeing going around
love it man
all right guys thank you for joining us
for this very special episode of impact
theory i hope that you got a lot of
value from dr judd i think that his
information and his knowledge is really
powerful he's actually going to be
teaching a class at impact theory
university for us
which i'm super excited about i think
that he's got tremendous ideas i think
his apps are
really extraordinary in terms of helping
people get real results which is of
course how i judge everything
i will echo his words in this time man
finding ways to
bring things down and find that calm
creative space which i think exists for
all of us no matter what's going on is
super important if you've been taking
cold showers like i suggest this is that
moment right in the midst of heightened
anxiety and heightened fear to actually
be able to center yourself and be calm
in these moments this is exactly what
you've been practicing for so um
long may that continue uh connection man
i did not expect that to be the answer
when we're talking about covet 19 but
there you have it connect with each
other over the internet
and find ways to get that connection
whether it's reading a book or just um
sending some love and i love that he
made it um about something that's
positive um you know giving somebody a
well done on social media it puts you in
a different frame of reference uh
something positive and uplifting i think
that's super important all right guys if
you haven't already be sure to subscribe
and until next time my friends be a
legendary take care if you're feeling
anxiety
there's actually a place from which you
can just feel it right and and be
actually indifferent to it or anything
else you could be feeling first you can
notice that anxiety isn't even that
unpleasant